docs: Multi-port support for v1.17 GA (#19401)
hashicorp/consul: website/content/docs/architecture/catalog/v2.mdx

## Introduction

When Consul registers services, it records [user-defined and Consul-assigned information](/consul/docs/architecture/catalog/v1#catalog-structure). To determine a service’s identity, v1 of the catalog API records the following information:

- IDs of the specific _service instances_ that are registered
- Locations of the _nodes_ the instances run on
- Names of the _services_ the instances are associated with

This information enables Consul to associate service names with the individual instances and their unique network addresses, and it is essential to Consul’s service discovery and service mesh operations.

The [Consul v1 catalog API](/consul/docs/architecture/catalog/v1) was designed prior to the introduction of Consul’s service mesh features. Communication in Consul’s service mesh is secured through Consul's ACL system, which requires that a Kubernetes ServiceAccount resource match the Service name. As a result, only one service can represent a service instance in the v1 catalog.

> The v2 catalog API aligns more closely with the [Kubernetes Gateway API's GAMMA initiative](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/gamma/), enabling functionality such as associating Kubernetes Pods with multiple Kubernetes Services and allowing Services and Pods registered with Consul to have multiple ports. For more information about how the differences between the catalog API impacts Consul operations, refer to [changes to Consul's existing architecture](#changes-to-consuls-existing-architecture).

Reviewer: (#changes-to-consuls-existing-architecture) might need to be (`#changes-to-consul-s-existing-architecture`)

## Constraints and limitations

Be aware of the following constraints and technical limitations on the v2 catalog API:

- The v2 catalog API only supports deployments using [Consul dataplanes](/consul/docs/connect/dataplane) instead of client agents. Consul on Kubernetes uses dataplanes by default.
- The v1 and v2 catalog APIs cannot run concurrently.
- The Consul UI does not support the v2 catalog API in this release. You must disable the UI in the Helm chart in order to use the v2 catalog API.
- HCP Consul does not support the v2 catalog API in this release. You cannot [link a self-managed cluster to HCP Consul](/hcp/docs/consul/self-managed) to access its UI or view observability metrics when it uses the v2 catalog.
- We do not recommend updating existing clusters to enable the v2 catalog in this release. Instead, deploy a new Consul cluster and [enable the v2 catalog in the Helm chart](/consul/docs/k8s/multiport/configure#enable-the-v2-catalog).

## Guidance

The following resources are available to help you use the v2 catalog API:

### Usage documentation

- [Multi-port services overview](/consul/docs/k8s/multiport/configure)

> - [Configure multi-port services](/consul/docs/k8s/multiport/configure)

Reviewer: Should both be linked to the same doc (`/consul/docs/k8s/multiport/configure`)?

---
layout: docs
page_title: v2 Catalog API
description: Learn about version 2 of the Consul catalog, which uses GAMMA specified resources. Learn how the v2 catalog corresponds to the v1 catalog and Kubernetes resources..
---

# v2 Catalog API

<Warning>
The v2 catalog API is in a beta release for testing and development purposes. Do not use the v2 catalog or multi-port services in secure production environments.

> </Warning>

Reviewer 2: Could we potentially move these v1 and v2 pages up to the API level? It's not just the catalog api that is changing, but rather all the APIs are going to have v2 analogues. And if someone navigates to the API docs, that may be where we want to make clear to the user that you can either use the v1 or v2 api for consul and that those have some different features.

Reviewer 2: V2 has a HTTP api also, so I think in the long term we want to show at the API level that these are different. Also there are catalog, mesh, and auth APIs that are supported in v2 so I think having a toggle of v1 or v2 api where the v1 api has all of the pages of the existing API under it and v2 api has all of the pages of v2 API reference under it would be good. But totally ok if we can't do that for the 1.17 docs.

## Catalog structure

Consul v1.17 introduces a new version of the catalog API designed to bridge differences between the Consul and Kubernetes data models. The v2 catalog API still tracks services and nodes for Consul, but replaces service instances with _workloads_ and _workload identites_.

The following table describes resources in the v2 catalog and compares them to the v1 catalog and Kubernetes resources. It also states whether these resources are defined by the user or computed by Consul when it registers a service.

| v2 Catalog resource | Description | Catalog v1 resource analogue | Kubernetes resource analogue | Source |
| :------------------ | :---------- | :--------------------------- | :--------------------------- | :----- |
| Service | The name of the service Consul registers a workload under | Service | None  | Defined by user in Kubernetes |

> | Node | The address of the node where the workload runs. | Node | Node | Computed by Consul |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Node | The address of the node where the workload runs. | Node | Kubernetes Node | Computed by Consul |
```

| Workload | An application instance running in a set of one or more Pods scheduled according to a Kubernetes Workload resource such as a Deployment or StatefulSet. | Service instance | Kubernetes Workloads | Defined by user in Kubernetes |

> | Workload identities | Provides a distinct identity for a Kubernetes Workload to assume in a Kubernetes cluster. | Service instance | Kubernetes Service Accounts | Defin by user in Kubernetes |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Workload identities | Provides a distinct identity for a workload to assume and is used for Traffic Permissions. | Service instance | Kubernetes Service Accounts | Defined by user in Kubernetes |
```
Removed the references to kubernetes since workload identity is a consul concept that would be needed for any workload.

> | Service endpoints | Maps services to workload addresses and endpoints. | None  | Service backend | Computed by Consul |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Service endpoints | Maps services to workload addresses and endpoints. | None  | Kubernetes Endpoints | Computed by Consul |
```

> | Health status | A resource for reporting the health status of a workload | Agent check | None | Computed by Consul |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Health status | A resource for reporting the health status of a workload | Service Instance health status | None | Computed by Consul |
```

> | Health check | A resource for defining the health checks for a workload. | Health check | Liveness, Readiness, and Startup Probes | Defined by user in Kubernetes |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Health check | A resource for defining the health checks for a workload. | Service Instance Health check | Liveness, Readiness, and Startup Probes | Defined by user in Kubernetes |
```

| Proxy configuration | Represents a configuration for a sidecar or gateway proxy. | `Proxy` field in service definition | None | Defined by user in Consul |

> | Destinations | Represents explicit service upstreams | None | Upstream Service annotation  | Defined by user in Kubernetes |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Destinations | Represents explicit service upstreams | Proxy Configuration | Upstream Service annotation  | Defined by user in Kubernetes |
```
The upstreams are defined in Proxy Configuration (docs here)[https://developer.hashicorp.com/consul/docs/connect/proxies/proxy-config-reference]

> | Traffic permissions | Enables L4 traffic authorization according to workload identity instead of service identity. | Service intentions | None | Defined by user in Consul |

Reviewer 2: We only allow specifying traffic permissions using L4 attributes (i.e allow/deny on a per port basis), but these can be specified for L4 or L7 applications on the mesh. L7 attributes like path-based traffic permissions are not yet supported.

Refer to [`consul resource`](/consul/docs/k8s/multiport/reference/resource-command) for more information about using the Consul CLI to interact with the v2 catalog.

## Changes to Consul’s existing architecture

The change in data models introduced by the v2 Catalog API impacts several aspects of Consul’s operations.

### Traffic permissions resource replaces service intentions

The most significant change to Consul’s architecture and operations when using the v2 catalog structure is the introduction of the TrafficPermissions resource. This resource replaces the service intentions configuration entry, and enables authorized service-to-service communication for both L4 and L7 applications.

For more information about this resource, including example configurations, refer to [TrafficPermissions configuration reference](/consul/docs/k8s/multiport/reference/trafficpermissions).

> ### HTTPRoute and GRPCRoute resources for L7 traffic management

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should say TCPRoute, HTTPRoute, and GRPCRoute resources are used for traffic management rather than making this an L7 specific section. I think we want to describe that all traffic management is controlled via these resources.

You can configure L7 traffic management behavior, such as service splitting, in an `HTTPRoute` or a `GRPCRoute` resource. In the v1 catalog, this behavior is defined in dedicated configuration entries. For examples, refer to [service splitter configuration entry reference](/consul/docs/connect/config-entries/service-splitter#examples).

For more information about these resource, including specifications and example configurations, refer to [HTTPRoute resource configuration reference](/consul/docs/k8s/multiport/reference/httproute) and [GRPCRoute resource configuration reference](/consul/docs/k8s/multiport/reference/grpcroute).

### New proxy configuration resource

In the v1 catalog, a service’s sidecar proxy and its behavior is [defined in the `Proxy` field of the service definition](/consul/docs/services/usage/define-services). You can also separately [define a service mesh proxy](/consul/docs/connect/proxies/deploy-service-mesh-proxies) and [configure proxy defaults](/consul/docs/connect/config-entries/proxy-defaults).

> The v2 catalog introduces the `ProxyConfiguration` resource, enabling the automatic configuration of sidecar proxy behavior according to Consul workload identity. Refer to [ProxyConfiguration resource configuration reference](/consul/docs/k8s/multiport/reference/proxyconfiguration) for more information.

Reviewer 2: ProxyConfiguration has most of the configuration that the Proxy field in v1 had, and it's not super related to workload identity, so I think we want to say something like "in v2 `ProxyConfiguration` is used to configure a workload's sidecar proxy behavior"
